[#737] self-update spec (#20)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io-specs: src/self-update/README.md

# Introduction

> That document specifies the feature self-update for thin-edge.
> 
> The self-update allows a Cloud Operator to update one thin-edge version that is installed on a device to a newer version, via the Cloud connection. The feature is referred as self-update cause that update process is managed by thin-edge own's Software Management.

Reviewer: I would be more direct adopting a user-document style.

```suggestion
Thin-edge self-update allows a Cloud Operator to update one thin-edge version that is installed on a device to a newer version, via the Cloud connection. The feature is referred as self-update cause that update process is managed by thin-edge own's Software Management.
```

# Requirements

* Be default self-update shall use Debian Package Manager APT.

>   * NOTE: APT Package Manager provides a very basic rollback mechanism that still can fail (e.g. due to some unexpected device state or power-loss).

Reviewer: For me this is not a requirement but the proposed solution.

Author: Now it's moved to section "Design Principles".

* Device Owner shall be able to use a power-fail safe filesystem and transaction-safe package manager (instead of APT) - if the device support any.
  * Therefore an extensible plugin shall be provided.
* In thin-edge package's installation logic no external tools (e.g. grep, sed, ...) shall be used. Instead Rust code/libraries shall be used.
  * This is to reduce external dependencies and so reduce risc for failures due missing tools or wrong version of tools.

# Expected Pre-Conditions 

The device and it's thereon installed thin-edge has to follow precondition below to allow successful self-update:

> 1) The current (old) thin-edge on the device must be installed with usual thin-edge installation, or at leat as usual thin-edge installation would do. That is to assure new thin-edge version that is about to be installed has all external and internal files, folders and resources (e.g. config files) available.

Reviewer: I don't understand what you mean by "or at leat as usual thin-edge installation would do".

3) Package Dependencies need to be solved using SW Management before self-update. This is since self-update will disable auto-dep solving to reduce additional risk during self-update.

*Hint: Before executing self-update on devices in the field it shall be tested on a kind of golden device that equals the device(s) in the field in system-environment, configuration and thin-edge version.*

# Execution Flow and involved Components
![Sequence Diagram Update SW-list](images/self-update.drawio.svg)

# Design Principles

### Run-Time Behaviour
* Self-Update is provided based on usual thin-egde's Software Management.
  * A plugin for module type "tedge-update" specifically handles thin-edge self-update.
* The plugin uses Debian Package Manager APT to upgrade requested thin-edge packages.
* When executing APT the plugin will disable auto dependency solving.
  * This is to avoid installing more than the requested packages to reduce risc for potential failures.

> * The plugin shall take all requested packages at once from SM Agent (i.E. Plugin API command "update-list" shall be used).

Reviewer: I see here a risk of inconsistency, the user being able to update only parts of thin-edge.

Did you consider the option to present thin-edge as a package that can only be updated as a whole?

* The plugin follows the contract of the Software Management Plugin API, with the exception of the way to report final result to the SM Agent:
  * As the new started SM Agent will be disconnected from tedge-update plugin's child-process, the plugin will store potential `stdout` and the final exit status to some persistent file.
  * The SM Agent will pickup that file and generates according update response for the mapper.

> * Potentially the spawned plugin-process need to detouched it-self from parent process SM Agent to avoid any impact when SM Agent process is stopped by APT upgrade procedure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Potentially the spawned plugin-process need to detach it-self from parent process SM Agent to avoid any impact when SM Agent process is stopped by APT upgrade procedure.
```

> * Potentially the spawned plugin-process need to detouched it-self from parent process SM Agent to avoid any impact when SM Agent process is stopped by APT upgrade procedure.

Reviewer 2: I'm not very fond of the whole super special case for updates.
I see a couple options here:
1. Detach the child saving a state (eg. pid, name etc) and after coming back up after the upgrade re attaching to the plugin process and reading stdout/exit codes (we could use `ptrace`). 
  * this would only be compatible with *nix system though
2. Just change slightly how the whole plugin system behaves such that there is always a state file where the plugin dumps results and agent can read them when it is up again. 
  * As much as it requires changes to the agent and the plugin API it will open path for more flexible use of plugins.
  * Requires only small changes to the APT plugin which could then handle upgrade process as proposed above.

Author: Now decision was taken to move to MQTT to transfer exit-code from plugin to SM Agent, in case of self-update. Spec is updated accordingly.

* Use of external tools (e.g. grep, sed, ...) shall be avoided in package's installation logic. Instead Rust code/libraries shall be used.
  * That is to reduce external dependencies and so reduce risc for failures.
* At very beginning of the installation/removal logic all required/touched external ressources (e.g. config files as "mosquitto.conf", external tools (if any left), ...) shall be checked for availibility/accessibility.
* If one external ressource is not available installation/removal procedure shall fail before any action was performed.

### Robustness in Self-Update processing
* When "tedge-update" plugin was started, no other update request for any other plugin must be in progress or started by the SM Agent.
  * Reason: APT will restart the SM Agent during upgrade, what would result into half-executed update procedures of other parallel running plugins and could lead to corrupted system behaviour.
  * It would be valid to execute any update requests for other plugins when tedge-update has completely finished. 
    It would be also valid to reject any other update request and report an error to Cloud while tedge upgrade is running. 

> * The plugin shall download all requested packages before any upgrade starts.

Reviewer: From where the packages are downloaded?

Author: Thanks @makr11st  for pointing that out. That's a mistake in the spec. The behaviour is the same as for all other plugins:
The SM agent will manage the download if any URL is given. Without any URL the package manager is resonsible.

Reviewer 3: This scheme will work today as `tedge` packages will only be distributed as binaries from cloud software repositories with a download URL that the agent can use. But, if we ever publish the `tedge` debian packages to the public apt repository or some other package manager's public repository, this scheme may not work as the agent wouldn't know how to download the installers from "some" public repository. Only the plugin would know how to interact with the repository of the underlying package manager.

That being said, for the current drop, where the tedge installers are guaranteed to be delivered as binaries from the cloud software repo with downloadable URLs, it should be fine.

Author: > But, if we ever publish the tedge debian packages to the public apt repository or some other package manager's public repository, this scheme may not work as the agent wouldn't know how to download the installers from "some" public repository. Only the plugin would know how to interact with the repository of the underlying package manager.

Good point. In case no URL is given and so the package manager (here: APT) is responsbible for the downloading as part of the installation, the plugin must instruct APT to: 1st download first all package; then 2nd install all packages. I updated the spec accoringly:

- For module type „tedge“ the plugin must instruct APT to first download all package that are part of the entire update request. Therefore implementation of plugin command update-list calls APT separately for download and for installation.
   - First all packages are downloaded by calling APT with command line option `--download-only`.
   - When all packages were successfully downloaded packages are installed by calling APT again with option `--no-download`.
   - If one or more downloads fails, the plugin will not install any package, but return with error.

1) The current (old) thin-edge on the device must be installed with usual thin-edge installation, or at leat as usual thin-edge installation would do. That is to assure new thin-edge version that is about to be installed has all external and internal files, folders and resources (e.g. config files) available.
2) Deployment of thin-edge and mosquitto must not be changed manually after initial installation (e.g. moving/renaming installed files, moving/renaming configuration files used by thin-edge, renaming users/groups created during installation, ...).

3) Package Dependencies need to be solved using SW Management before self-update. This is since self-update will disable auto-dep solving to reduce additional risk during self-update.

*Hint: Before executing self-update on devices in the field it shall be tested on a kind of golden device that equals the device(s) in the field in system-environment, configuration and thin-edge version.*

# Execution Flow and involved Components
![Sequence Diagram Update SW-list](images/self-update.drawio.svg)

# Design Principles

### Details about the SM Plugin

> * A designated Software Management module type - namely "tedge" - will be used manage the self-update.

Author: I adopted your wording for that sentence. The rest of the document we might re-phrase later. I just want to push that initial version trhough review first.

* The existing SM plugin "apt" will be used and extended to manage that module type "tedge". 

>   * A device owner can implement an own plugin for module type "tedge", e.g. to use any other package manager than APT for self-update. 

Reviewer: I would remove this sentence unless we provide the contract between thine-edge and the specific self-update plugin.

Author: Yes, removed.

> * A softlink to be created in `/etc/tedge/sm-plugins/` named `tedge` that points to `apt` plugin, will make the SM agent aware.

Reviewer 3: Since the `tedge` plugin is just a symlink of `apt` plugin, how will we prevent the tedge plugin from re-reporting the apt software list(coming from the symlinked apt plugin) when the agent queries it for the software list? We'll make the tedge-agent exclude the tedge plugin from reporting the software list ? In that case, how will the tedge binaries have the `::tedge` suffix when reported in the UI? Adding that suffix from inside the apt plugin(e.g `tedge-agent::tedge`) wouldn't work as it will be further suffixed with `::apt` by the agent before sending to the cloud.

Reviewer 3: Got the answer to this from the #759 which proposes the apt plugin to detect whether the plugin is called as `tedge` or as `apt` and then report the list accordingly.

> * The plugin managing module type "tedge" must take all packages of an update request at once from SM Agent (i.E. Plugin API command "update-list" must be used). That is to get the plugin independent from potential restarts of the SM agent (those restarts are part of updating the SM agent).

Reviewer: I don't understand.

Author: > I don't understand.

Let's rephrase it:

```suggestion
* The plugin managing module type "tedge" must take all packages information of an update request at once from SM Agent (i.E. Plugin API command "update-list" must be used). That is since the SM Agent will restart in the moment when it is updated by the plugin. So the plugin must process the entire update request without any further SM Agent action.```

Does that clarify your question?

Reviewer: I got it now.

```suggestion
The agent must request updates on the `tedge` plugin using the `update-list` API of this plugin. So the plugin can process the entire update request without any further SM Agent action. This is required because the agent will be stopped by the plugin.
```

Reviewer 2: This still does not address a state where only some packages succeed. We would have to define a revert operation for partial updates or this will leave the system in the not complete state.
E.g:
* We are on tedge 0.4 (implies tedge-mapper 0.4 and tedge-agent 0.4).
* We request upgrade of following packages: tedge 0.5.1, tedge-agent 0.5.1, tedge-mapper 0.5.2 (even though they are part of the same release the user has to know which versions could be compatible).
* Installation starts but only tedge-mapper succeeds installation to 0..5.1, tedge-agent stays at 0.4

We have a system in rather broken state because there is no way to revert partial upgrade.

I think thin-edge has to be provided as a single package containing multiple binaries and without that we will have to maintain too many special cases.

Author: > I got it now.

@didier-wenzek, I just slightly changed your suggestion:

```suggestion
* The agent must request updates on the `tedge` plugin using the `update-list` API of this plugin. So the plugin can process the entire update request without any further SM Agent action. This is required because the agent will be restarted by the plugin.
```

Author: > I think thin-edge has to be provided as a single package containing multiple binaries and without that we will have to maintain too many special cases.

Yes, I agree. It really makes sense to re-package thin-edge in a way, that we have a kind of "core package" that can be used for self-update. I will take care to have a separate ticket for that topic.

* Before any package update for module type "tedge" starts, all needed installation resources for the entire update request must be downloaded (i.E. all \*.deb packages for APT). That is to get the plugin uncoupled from any potential network issue during update procedure.
  * For all packages with some URL given in the update request the SM Agent manages download before plugin start, and provides local file paths to the plugin.<br/>

>     TODO: What happens if one package download fails in SM agent? Does plugin maybe need to check if all files are locally available?

Reviewer: If a download fails, the agent must stop self-update.

Author: > If a download fails, the agent must stop self-update.

Yes. And I checked, the Agent is already implemented that way.

>   * For all packages without any URL given in the update request the Package Manager (i.E. APT) will manage the download as part of the update. Therefor the plugin must instruct the package manager to first download **all** packages. 

Reviewer: It might be good to say how. I guess this is a combination of the `--download-only` and `--no-download` options of `apt-get`, but I would prefer to have to details here.

Author: I detailed that aspect as below:

- For module type „tedge“ the plugin must instruct APT to first download all packages that are part of the entire update request. Therefore implementation of plugin command update-list calls APT separately for download and for installation.
   - First all packages are downloaded by calling APT with command line option `--download-only`.
   - When all packages were successfully downloaded packages are installed by calling APT again with option `--no-download`.
   - If one or more downloads fail, the plugin will not install any package, but return with error.

    * If all packages were successfully downloaded, the package manager can start updating packages.<br/>
    * Instead, if one or more download fails the plugin must stop before any installed package was touched by update, and report the entire update process as failed to the SM agent<br/>

> * After processing the complete update request the plugin will publish the overall exit code as MQTT retain message to topic `tedge/plugins/software/<plugin name>`, and exits.

Reviewer: I might be good to say shortly why.

Author: > I might be good to say shortly why.

```suggestion
* After processing the complete update request the plugin will publish the overall exit code as MQTT retain message to topic `tedge/plugins/software/<plugin name>`, and exits.<br/>
  NOTE: That is, since during processing the update the SM Agent will restart, and the restarted SM Agent process will be disconnected from plugin process and it's exit code.
```

> * After processing the complete update request the plugin will publish the overall exit code as MQTT retain message to topic `tedge/plugins/software/<plugin name>`, and exits.

Author: I do not want the plugin to talk directly to the mapper. Instead it shall report to the SM agent. 

That is now the plugin is not aware of any Mapper or it's interface. And moreover the plugin would not know the request-id that is required in the JSON response.

I really want to keep that clear separation between Mapper, Agent and Plugins

* As both module types "tedge" and "apt" use same package manager APT, the plugin manages a blacklist to allow later to distinguish packages reported by Package Managers `apt list` command.

>   * The blacklist is a TOML file that stores package names of all packages that were installed/updated with module type "tedge".

Reviewer: I would simply use the prefix `tedge`.

Reviewer: My previous comment was not clear.

I don't see the point of using a blacklist file. I would simply tag as managed by `tedge` all the packages which name starts with `tedge`.

Furthermore, I think that the proposed approach with a blacklist file will not work. One starts with an empty file, so *all* the packages, including `tedge`, will be marked as of the `pat` type. The device admin will not change that type before sending a request and the `tedge` package will never be listed as special.

Reviewer 2: I suppose this could be workaround with using a prefix for tedge packages, for drop 1 we can assume all packages that names start with `tedge_` are special cases. This would simplify the implementation.

Author: I have replaced the blacklist approach with naming convention (prefix "tedge_") as below:

- As the plugin serves both module types "tedge" and "apt", the SM Agent will execute the plugin twice with the LIST command; once for each mode type. To distinguish packages listed by APT package manager per module type all packages prefixed with "tedge_" are assumed as module type "tedge".
   - When the plugin is called with LIST command for module type "tedge", packages prefixed with "tedge_" are reported.
   - When the plugin is called with LIST command for module type "apt", all packages withoutprefix "tedge_" are reported.

  * When the plugin manages an update request for a package with module type "tedge" it adds the package to the blacklist.
  * When the plugin manages an update request for a package with module type "apt" it removes the package from the blacklist.
  * When the plugin is called with LIST command for module type "apt", all non tedge packages (all installed but not blacklisted ones) will be reported.

>   * When the plugin is called with LIST command for module type "tedge", all tedge packages (all installed and blacklisted ones) will be reported.

Reviewer: This is an important point that I would move above just after telling that a *single* plugin manages *two* types of packages.

Author: Yes, moved.

### Details about the SM Agent

> * The SM agent must accept the final exit code of a plugin execution via MQTT retain message on topic `tedge/plugins/software/<plugin name>`, send according update result message to the mapper, and clear the retain message on the topic afterwards.

Reviewer: To make things more understandable, I would :
* tell why we are doing this
* group here the responsibilities related both to the plugin and the agent

Reviewer 2: Is there an intention to preserve and extend current exit codes or just change for all plugins?

Author: I added more details about that aspect to spec, as below.

Please check if that answers your points:

* Transfer of plugins exit code to the SM Agent:<br/>
  NOTE: During execution of plugin for module type „tedge“ it is valid (or even expected) that the SM Agent will restart. The restarted SM Agent process will be disconnected from still running plugin's process and it's exit code.

  * For module type tedge the SM agent must accept the final exit code of a plugin execution via MQTT retain message on topic `tedge/plugins/software/tedge`, send according update result message to the mapper, and clear the retain message on the topic afterwards.
  * It might happen that the SM Agent does not restart and keeps connected to the plugin for module type "tedge" (e.g. when agent is not part of the update request, or the update fails). Also then the exit code that is reported by the plugin via MQTT must be used, instead of the exit code reported from plugin's process exit.

* At very beginning of the installation/removal logic all required/touched external ressources (e.g. config files as "mosquitto.conf", external tools (if any left), ...) shall be checked for availibility/accessibility.
* If one external ressource is not available installation/removal procedure shall fail before any action was performed.

### Robustness in Self-Update processing
* When "tedge" plugin was started, no other update request for any other plugin must be in progress or started by the SM Agent.
  * Reason: APT will restart the SM Agent during upgrade, what would result into half-executed update procedures of other parallel running plugins and could lead to corrupted system behaviour.
  * It would be valid to execute any update requests for other plugins when tedge has completely finished. 
    It would be also valid to reject any other update request and report an error to Cloud while tedge update is running. 
* When executing APT the plugin will disable auto dependency solving.
  * This is to avoid installing more than the requested packages to reduce risc for potential failures.
* SM Agent shall fail when plugin for "tedge" does not support "update_list".

>   * This is since an update request will fail when there is more than one package and the agent is concerned

Reviewer 3: After seeing the complexities in combining tedge update along with other package updates, I'm also in favour of not doing that in the initial drop. The UX of doing everything together is definitely better, but we could do that enhancement a later drop if acceptable. I honestly don't feel that isolated tedge self update is a deal breaker.

>   * This is since an update request will fail when there is more than one package and the agent is concerned

Author: There is one significant reason to use command "update_list". That is since the SM agen will restart during the update procedure (as it is part of the update request).

Lets imaging the update request as below:

    Package to update: tedge_apt_plugin.deb, tedge_agent.deb, tedge_mapper.deb
    
When using the package-wise commands "install" and "remove" instead of "update_list", the flow would look as below:
   1) Agent calls: `apt-plugin install tedge_apt_plugin.deb`
   2) Agent calls: `apt-plugin install tedge_agent.deb`
   3) Agent restarts due to installation of tedge_agent.deb
   4) Package tedge_mapper.deb would not be processed since Agent had restared.

> * SM Agent shall fail when update request with packages for module type "tedge" contains also other module types.

Reviewer 3: After seeing the complexities in combining tedge update along with other package updates, I'm also in favour of not doing that in the initial drop. The UX of doing everything together is definitely better, but we could do that enhancement a later drop if acceptable. I honestly don't feel that isolated tedge self update is a deal breaker.

> * SM Agent shall fail when update request with packages for module type "tedge" contains also other module types.

Author: Team decision was taken to go with that restriction (module type "tedge" to be exclusively in an update request), at least for drop 1.

* Before any package update for module type "tedge" starts, all needed installation resources for the entire update request must be downloaded (i.E. all \*.deb packages for APT). That is to get the plugin uncoupled from any potential network issue during update procedure.
  * For all packages with some URL given in the update request the SM Agent manages download before plugin start, and provides local file paths to the plugin.<br/>
    TODO: What happens if one package download fails in SM agent? Does plugin maybe need to check if all files are locally available?
  * For all packages without any URL given in the update request the Package Manager (i.E. APT) will manage the download as part of the update. Therefore implementation of plugin command update-list calls APT separately for download and for installation.
    * First all packages are downloaded by calling APT with command line option `--download-only`.
    * When all packages were successfully downloaded packages are installed by calling APT again with option `--no-download`.
    * If one or more downloads fail, the plugin will not install any package, but return with error.

> 

Reviewer 3: After the installation of individual tedge packages are complete, some more actions will have to performed to wire things together, right? Like restarting starting things in a certain order or some other "update logic" that can't be performed at an individual binary's maintainer script level but have to be done as a post-processing step after every required component is installed? Isn't that also a responsibility of the plugin?

We may not be able to define what that logic would be right now, as it may change from one version to another(i.e, the post-processing required for an update to 0.7 might be different from an update to 0.6. It might even change based on the already installed version). So, just saying that it probably is worth acknowledging the possibility of additional post-processing beyond what the maintainer scripts of individual debian packages can handle.

Author: > Isn't that also a responsibility of the plugin?

No, the plugin can not do that job. Since it is part of the current installed (old) version, and can never know what the new installed version needs. Imagine there are new services, services removed, or other things to be considered, only the new version can take care. So finally it must be part of the new package(s).

> We may not be able to define what that logic would be right now, as it may change from one version to another

Exactly thats what I mean above. That logic must come with the new version. It might be directly part of the installation logic, or managed by some tedge init command (that obviously depends on the technical detail of the update step to be done). However it must be part of the new package and shall be triggered by the installation logic.

* Before any package update for module type "tedge" starts, all needed installation resources for the entire update request must be downloaded (i.E. all \*.deb packages for APT). That is to get the plugin uncoupled from any potential network issue during update procedure.
  * For all packages with some URL given in the update request the SM Agent manages download before plugin start, and provides local file paths to the plugin.<br/>
    TODO: What happens if one package download fails in SM agent? Does plugin maybe need to check if all files are locally available?
  * For all packages without any URL given in the update request the Package Manager (i.E. APT) will manage the download as part of the update. Therefore implementation of plugin command update-list calls APT separately for download and for installation.
    * First all packages are downloaded by calling APT with command line option `--download-only`.
    * When all packages were successfully downloaded packages are installed by calling APT again with option `--no-download`.

>     * If one or more downloads fail, the plugin will not install any package, but return with error.

Author: There are no correction measues in the plugin. For really fail-safe self-update the device would need to provide some transaction-safe package manager and some powerfail-safe filesystem. And the device owner can adapt the tedge plugin to make use of both.

If have now added some statements about that fact into section "Scope".
